# Engineering and web development interviews

## Learning Objective

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to prepare for a software engineering interview.

## Overview

If you are interested in applying for a new role in the field of software engineering, you will most likely be required to go through an interview process for the hiring manager to assess your skills and fit for the position. In this lesson, you'll review the common steps of a software engineering technical interview and how to prepare for it.

## The path of an interview

Interviewing for a software engineering role or a similar role can vary widely depending on the company, the industry, and the specific responsibilities of the role. An interview for a full-stack engineer, for example, will likely be different than an interview for a frontend web developer.

Nevertheless, there are still some common steps to the interview process. When you begin an interview process for a technical role, you will likely encounter many of the following steps:

- Application process
    
- Take-home challenge
    
- Technical and culture-fit phone screen
    
- Onsite coding or whiteboard challenge
    

These steps are described next, including any variations that you may encounter.

## [](https://github.com/Thinkful-Ed/web-dev-programs/blob/master/library/careers_interviewing_web_dev/content.md#application-process)Application process

The first step in the interview process is actually applying to the role. What is required for the role will differ, but you will often need to include the following information:

- A resume
    
- A cover letter
    
- Your GitHub profile
    
- Your personal website
    
- A LinkedIn profile
    

## [](https://github.com/Thinkful-Ed/web-dev-programs/blob/master/library/careers_interviewing_web_dev/content.md#take-home-challenge)Take-home challenge

Sometimes, you will be given a take-home challenge before moving on to the next step of the process—even before you speak with anyone in person or over the phone. If you encounter this, the company is probably attempting to filter out applicants. You may also receive a take-home challenge after completing a phone screen.

Take-home challenges can vary considerably in terms of difficulty and length. All of the following examples are possible:

- You are given a web application to build with limited functionality and particular constraints. For example, you must build a website that filters movies based on a search string in the URL. (An example project is included at the end of this lesson.)
    
- You are given a small set of coding challenges to solve. (Examples of these kinds of questions are included at the end of this lesson.)
    
- You are given a bug to fix on an existing codebase or are asked to review existing code and give your opinion.
    

Typically, the process will look like this:

1. You will receive an email admitting you to the next step of the interview process. The hiring manager provides instructions and a deadline. They also specify how to submit the problem.
    
2. You will work on completing the problem according to the instructions. If it is a project, you will likely develop the project on your own machine before sending them a GitHub link or zip file. If it is a coding challenge, you will likely complete the problem on an external website.
    
3. Once your submission has been reviewed, you will be notified whether or not you are being moved to the next step of the process.
    

As soon as you receive the email with the deadline, check your calendar and make certain that you believe that you have enough time to complete the problem. If you have something important coming up, do not hesitate to ask for a modest extension.

## [](https://github.com/Thinkful-Ed/web-dev-programs/blob/master/library/careers_interviewing_web_dev/content.md#technical-and-cultural-phone-screen)Technical and cultural phone screen

This step of the process typically involves a mixture of casual questions, technical questions, and possibly some live coding. If more than a conversation is required, the interviewer should let you know upfront what is expected of you.

Either way, you may want to ask if there's anything in particular that you should be prepared to discuss.

### [](https://github.com/Thinkful-Ed/web-dev-programs/blob/master/library/careers_interviewing_web_dev/content.md#casual-questions)Casual questions

During this part of the interview, you will likely be asked generic interview questions, such as the following:

- Tell me about yourself.
    
- Why did you decide to become a web developer?
    
- Tell me about your past experiences.
    

Prepare for these kinds of basic biographical questions ahead of time so that you do not stumble while describing yourself or your past experiences.

### [](https://github.com/Thinkful-Ed/web-dev-programs/blob/master/library/careers_interviewing_web_dev/content.md#technical-questions)Technical questions

During this part of the interview, the interviewer will ask you generic coding questions about languages that you know or high-level concepts. They may also ask you more specific questions about projects that you've completed that are showcased on your GitHub or portfolio website.

If you previously completed a coding challenge of some sort, they may ask you questions specifically about that coding challenge.

#### [](https://github.com/Thinkful-Ed/web-dev-programs/blob/master/library/careers_interviewing_web_dev/content.md#generic-coding-questions)Generic coding questions

If the interviewer decides to ask you general questions about coding, the topics can range from the abstract to the highly specific. Here are a few example questions:

- What is one of your favorite parts of JavaScript?
    
- Describe the process that happens when you perform a search on Google. In your answer, refer to DNS, browsers, servers, and databases.
    
- What is a closure?
    
- What are the four pillars of object-oriented programming?
    
- What are global variables?
    

A Google search for JavaScript interview questions will provide you with more than enough questions to look up.

#### [](https://github.com/Thinkful-Ed/web-dev-programs/blob/master/library/careers_interviewing_web_dev/content.md#specific-coding-questions)Specific coding questions

Your interviewer may also ask you questions about your code or about code that they gave you ahead of time.

To prepare for these kinds of questions, make sure that you are familiar with your own code. It is also helpful to have written comments for your code, especially if it is something particularly complex. Make sure that you are comfortable explaining what your code is doing as well as how it is doing it.

Here are some examples:

- I see that you have testing in your projects. Do you find testing useful while developing an application? Why or why not?
    
- In your capstone project, you enabled CORS. Can you describe what the CORS package is doing and what CORS is?
    
- In your capstone project, you made use of a complex component structure. Can you describe how you structured your project to manage state?
    

### [](https://github.com/Thinkful-Ed/web-dev-programs/blob/master/library/careers_interviewing_web_dev/content.md#live-coding)Live coding

If the interviewer has you do some live coding, they will likely have you use a platform that lets them see or share your screen. Hopefully, the interviewer will give you some idea ahead of time about what kind of problem you will be solving.

During a situation like this, remain calm and ask questions if you get confused. Treat this like a pairing session, where the interviewer is your partner. Although you will be driving the experience, it is common to forget some syntax or need to clarify some of the requirements.

## [](https://github.com/Thinkful-Ed/web-dev-programs/blob/master/library/careers_interviewing_web_dev/content.md#onsite-technical-challenge-or-whiteboard-interview)Onsite technical challenge or whiteboard interview

If you are brought in to do a technical interview in person, it is likely that you may be asked some of the same coding questions described earlier. You may also be asked to either complete a technical challenge with a member of the engineering team or solve a challenge in front of engineering team members.

The number of people who you interact with really depends on the size of the company and the engineering team. You may speak with just one or two people throughout your experience, or you may meet with an entire team.

### [](https://github.com/Thinkful-Ed/web-dev-programs/blob/master/library/careers_interviewing_web_dev/content.md#coding-challenge)Coding challenge

If you end up pairing with another member of the team, you will likely be solving a small problem with the help of the team member. The team member will often introduce the codebase and the problem, and then the two of you will work together.

Often, this style of interview is as much about solving the problem as it is about how you ask questions and work with the other developer. During this process, you want to use technical language and ask questions about why and how the code works. Usually, you'll be free to look up syntax issues, just as you would while normally developing.

### [](https://github.com/Thinkful-Ed/web-dev-programs/blob/master/library/careers_interviewing_web_dev/content.md#whiteboard-interview)Whiteboard interview

A whiteboard challenge is a classic interview component for software engineering roles. In recent years, this practice's usefulness has been questioned. However, it is still likely that you will be asked to complete one of these challenges.

A whiteboard question will require that you solve an algorithmic problem without the use of a computer. Typically, you'll be standing up at a whiteboard, marker in hand, in front of one or two developers. This is often challenging for a few reasons:

- You likely rely on your code editor to fill in the blanks for syntax and methods that you don't know. During a whiteboard interview, you will need to recall that information from memory.
    
- The problem that you will be given may be conceptually difficult and possibly require you to find an optimal solution. These kinds of problems are difficult on their own, even with a computer.
    
- Standing up and talking about code while you write it is difficult!
    

To prepare yourself for a whiteboard interview, practice solving coding challenges without the use of a computer. As you practice, talk out loud and write the problem down on a sheet of paper or a whiteboard, if you have one. Try to emulate the experience as best as you can.

Example whiteboard questions are included in the following section.

## [](https://github.com/Thinkful-Ed/web-dev-programs/blob/master/library/careers_interviewing_web_dev/content.md#example-coding-project)Example coding project

### Expectations of take-home exercise

The goal of this exercise is to demonstrate your ability and knowledge around building full-stack web applications. We want to see what kind of choices you make in terms of both the visual design and the architectural design.

This exercise should take you around four hours to complete. Please feel free to ask us questions ahead of time to clarify requirements or discuss the due date if it does not work for you.

### Deliverable

In this exercise, you will be building a simple website that organizes homes for sale. Your website should have the following features:

- Display all homes on a single page, where only the image, price, address, and registration date are shown.
    
- Sort homes by price and registration date, both ascending and descending.
    
- Click a home to see more information, including the real estate agent details and a brief description.
    
- A button on the home page should let any user add a new home through a form. All information is required.
    

The home data should be stored in a persistent storage solution. To start, you should include the following data: [homes.json](https://gist.github.com/bwreid/e8e7b243939323877bbdffc7021cb3c3).

### Technical constraints

You are welcome to build this project using whatever stack you prefer. Please keep in mind that you must do the following:

- You must include a persistent storage solution for your application.
    
- You must deploy your application to the web so that we may access it.
    

Outside of that, have fun with your stack—but be ready to defend your decisions!

### Submission details

When you are done, please respond to this email with a link to your deployed application and your GitHub. In your GitHub repository's README, please include instructions on how to install and run your application.

## [](https://github.com/Thinkful-Ed/web-dev-programs/blob/master/library/careers_interviewing_web_dev/content.md#code-challenge-resources)Code challenge resources

There are numerous websites that will help you practice small but difficult problems. These kinds of problems could show up during a code screen or during a whiteboard interview. Following are just a few examples:

- [HackerRank](https://www.hackerrank.com/)
    
- [Exercism](https://exercism.io/)
    
- [Codewars](https://www.codewars.com/)
    
- [LeetCode](https://leetcode.com/)
    
- [CodeSignal](https://codesignal.com/developers/)