# After the interview process

## Learning Objective

After you complete this lesson, you should be able to conduct proper follow-up after an interview, regardless of whether you move forward or don't get the job.

## Overview

Properly following up after you receive a job offer, or a notice that you didn't get the job, is particularly important. That's because internal networking plays a big part in your career growth potential and success. Showing gratitude toward your interviewers for the opportunity to interview goes a long way toward furthering your career growth. In your follow-up, you can also briefly mention or inquire about the next steps, whether in the newly accepted role or in your current role. Each situation will require slightly different communication and follow-up.

## Key Terms

Follow-up

Part of the interview process for a job application, email, or in-person communication that expresses your gratitude for the opportunity to interview and, if applicable, inquiry about next steps

## If you received an offer  

Receiving a job offer is exciting! You can, and should, relish in this accomplishment. You worked hard to get where you are; however, in your celebration, it's important that you don't overlook the significance of following up after you accept your new role. This includes following up to those that extended the offer to you and to the manager you will be leaving, if applicable.  

### Follow-up  

Following up can be done via email or in person, although it's often easier to do via email. You'll want to follow up with the individual or team that extended the offer to you, as well as the manager you will be leaving. Occasionally, they may be the same person. 

Following up with the interviewing individual or team: For this communication, you'll want to be brief and show your gratitude. A simple note, in which you thank them for the opportunity and reiterate why you are excited about your new role, is perfect. Here's an example:  

Hi Elyse, 

I am thrilled to accept the role of sales manager. I am excited for the opportunity to drive production for the sales team with a data-driven approach, supercharged by empathy and a passion for sales. I look forward to receiving the onboarding information for my new role.

Thanks, 

Amy 

Following up with your soon-to-be former manager: It's likely that your soon-to-be former manager had a hand in you getting an offer. It’s common for the hiring manager to talk to an internal candidate’s current manager to get insight into their performance in their current role. You should thank your current manager for their part in helping you gain the skills your new role requires during your time on their team. Your follow-up doesn’t have to be over the top. A simple thank you can go a long way. Here's an example: 

Hi Jessie, 

As you know, I recently accepted the position of sales manager. I wanted to thank you for your leadership over the last 2 years. With your guidance, I was able to gain the leadership skills necessary to take on this new role. Although we will now be working in different departments, I look forward to continuing working toward the same mission.

Thanks, 

Kristen

## If you didn't receive an offer  

Candidates often become invested and emotionally attached to the new role that they are applying for, so it's normal to feel frustrated or sad when you receive notice that you did not get the role you applied for. Alternatively, you might feel relieved that you did not get the new role, as it may show that you need more time to grow into the desired role—or that you should consider going in a different direction with your career growth.

Whatever your emotions may be, take time to sit with them for a day or two. Then, it’s time for post-interview follow-up communication.  

### Follow-up  

Regardless of your emotions after not receiving a job offer, you should follow up with the individual or group that interviewed you for the role. Your note should express gratitude for the opportunity to interview.  

Still interested in the role: If you are still genuinely interested in the role you applied for, you could ask about specific skills that you should improve on to increase your chance of filling that role in the future. Here's an example:

Hi Brett, 

Thank you for the opportunity to interview for the sales team lead role. While disappointed that I won't be moving into this role, I am still very happy to be a part of XYZ company. It is still my goal to move into a leadership role within our company. Could you please provide me with one or two skills that I can work on until the next opportunity arises?  

Thanks,

Caroline 

No longer interest in the role: Sometimes, after going through the interview process, you may realize that a role truly isn’t what you expected or desire anymore. If this is the case, you should still thank your interviewers for their time. There is no need to ask for specific suggestions for future interviews for this specific role. You can use this example: 

Hi Nicole, 

I wanted to thank you for the opportunity to interview for the sales team lead role. Regardless of the outcome of the interview, it was a great learning experience for me. Speaking with you reminded me of why I enjoy working for this company—it is full of passionate people working towards our company mission. 

Thanks again, 

Alan

### What’s next?  

So, you didn’t get the job offer, and you’ve sent your post-interview follow-up. You may be asking yourself, “Now what?” The most important thing is to not make an emotional decision. You may feel that knee-jerk reaction to quit your current role. Consider taking some time to settle back into your role.

After a few weeks, you can reevaluate your situation. Did you receive any actionable feedback from any of your interviewers? For example, maybe they said that you didn’t have enough leadership experience to take on a team lead. You can speak with your current boss to see if there are any current or upcoming leadership opportunities within your role. Then, you can set a new timeframe before you start looking for other internal opportunities.  

Here's a recap: 

1. Settle back into your current role.
    
2. If applicable, evaluate and apply any feedback from your interviewers.
    
3. Set a new timeframe for seeking other internal opportunities.
    
4. Continue working hard to gain experience in your current role. 
    

## Summary

Communication after your interview is a key part of the process, regardless of the outcome of the interview. It can show your new manager that they made the right decision in extending you an offer, or it can show the interview panel that you will be a great candidate in the future. Spending time to craft thoughtful communication will help you down the road with your internal career growth. 

## Additional resources 

- [You didn’t get that internal job you really wanted. Now what?](https://hbr.org/2019/12/you-didnt-get-that-internal-job-you-really-wanted-now-what)
    
- [You were passed over for an internal position. Now what?](https://www.forbes.com/sites/melodywilding/2020/10/06/you-were-passed-over-for-an-internal-position-now-what/?sh=2cfecede6e4f)