# Exercise: Practice a behavioral interview

## Learning Objective

By the end of this lesson, you'll understand how to practice the behavioral components of interviews.

Tip

This career exercise is optional but recommended as you start thinking about the next step in your career. It may take time to coordinate, as some options require you to meet with a new connection or another person. You can continue working on this exercise on your own time after completing this lesson.

## Exercise instructions

Using the best practices that you learned in the Mastering the soft skills of interviewing lesson, conduct a mock behavioral interview with a colleague, a friend, or a family member. Then, submit a summary of your experience, and complete the self-graded checklist at the end of the lesson.

### 1. Set up your mock interview

Provide your interviewer with the following list of questions to ask you during the interview:

- Tell me about yourself.
    
- How many years of experience do you have (in this role)?
    
- Tell me about a recent project that you're proud of.
    
- What are your weaknesses?
    
- Tell me about a time that you identified a problem at work. How did you solve it?
    
- What are your salary requirements?
    
- Optional: You can also encourage your interviewer to ask a few additional questions, as a challenge.
    

Tip

It's helpful to write out your answers to these questions ahead of time, and then practice saying them aloud until you sound natural and have them memorized. This helps you prepare for your mock interview, and you can keep and continue to refer to your answers as a way to prepare for future job interviews.

Additionally, review the self-graded checklist at the end of the lesson and provide it to your interviewer. This will ensure that you are prepared, and it will help them provide relevant feedback.

### 2. Complete your mock interview

Answer the questions using the skills you've learned in this module. You've got this!

### 3. Ask for feedback

Get feedback from your interviewer about what you did well and what you could improve. Provide them with the self-graded checklist at the end of the lesson to focus their feedback.

### 4. Complete a written summary of your mock interview

When you're done, complete a written summary of your mock interview. Your summary should include the following information:

- The first name and last name of the person who conducted your mock interview
    
- What you did well and what you can improve
    
- What you learned
    
- How you will apply what you learned
    

### 5. Submit your mock interview materials

When you're ready, submit the summary of your mock interview and complete the checklist at the end of the lesson.

## Examples of strong interview answers

Below, you'll see six example interview questions along with an example answer for each question. These example answers are designed to help you prep for your interview and represent what exemplary answers for this project look like. 

### Tell me about yourself.

My name is Emet, and I'm a project manager. I started out as an instructional designer, which includes a lot of project management. In addition to developing curriculum, I was responsible for making sure that my projects were delivered on time, as well as managing subject-matter experts' tasks and schedules.

The project management part of the work has always been my favorite part of the job, so I decided that it was time to transition fully to project management. To make sure that I have all of the skills that I need, I recently completed a certificate program in project management.

In that program, I learned to plan, schedule, and budget for business projects, use project management tools, and create project summary reports. I also learned how to handle the less technical aspects of the job, like resolving conflicts and motivating people to complete work on time.

### How many years of experience do you have?

I've been doing data analysis for about three years. In my last job, I did basic sales forecasting with Excel, and I recently completed a six-month data analysis program at Chegg Skills. There, I created pivot tables, charts, and models with Excel; learned to query, aggregate, and group data with SQL, and created data visualizations with Tableau. I also learned the fundamentals of programming in Python, as well as how to interface with data APIs.

### Tell me about a recent project that you're proud of.

At Chegg Skills, I completed a variety of projects. Some were group projects so that we could mimic a team workplace environment, some involved pair programming with senior engineers, and some were individual projects.

For my capstone project, I developed a web app that helps users plan road trips with scheduled stops. Whatever route the user chooses, the app provides weather forecasts and suggests food and lodging options. This was built using JavaScript, Angular, Node, Express, HTML, CSS, and the Google Directions & Places APIs. Most of that I learned at Chegg Skills, but I taught myself Angular while I was developing the app.

### What are your weaknesses?

Though I've never missed a deadline, in the past I've struggled with staying organized. I recently started adding every single thing on my to-do list to a Google calendar, which has made a huge difference. I'm also teaching myself how to use Kanban boards and project management software, like Asana. 

### Tell me about a time that you identified a problem at work. How did you solve it?

At my last job, we didn't have a marketing department. We had a local base of loyal customers but weren't doing anything to attract new customers. So, we only got new customers because of proximity or word of mouth.

In an effort to attract new customers, I volunteered to create a social media presence for our business. I started with Facebook and Instagram and made sure to post at least weekly on each platform. Eventually, I got strategic about it and started including series and incentives; within six months, our customer base grew by 25%. 

### What are your salary requirements?

Good question. According to Glassdoor, the average salary for UX designers in Seattle is $95,000. Does that sound right to you?